
The 1980 ACM Turing Award Lecture Delivered at ACM '80, Nashville, Tennessee, October 27, 1980 The 1980 ACM Turing Award was presented to Charles Antony Richard Hoare, Professor of Computation at the University of Oxford,  England, by Walter Carlson, Chairman of the Awards committee, at the ACM Annual Conference in Nashville, Tennessee, October 27,  1980. Professor Hoare was selected by the General Technical Achievement Award Committee for his fundamental contributions to the definition and design of program- ming languages. His work is characterized by an unusual combination  of insight, originality, elegance, and impact. He is best known for his work on axiomatic definitions of programming languages through the use of techniques popularly referred to as axiomatic semantics. He developed ingenious algorithms such as Quicksort and was responsible for inventing and promulgating advanced data struc- turing techniques in scientific programming languages. He has also made important contributions to operating systems through the study of monitors. His most recent work is on communicating sequential processes. C.A.R. I-Ioare Prior to his appointment to the University of Oxford in 1977, Professor Hoare was Professor of Computer Science at The Queen's University in Belfast, Ireland from 1968 to 1977 and was a  Visiting Professor at Stanford University in 1973. From 1960 to 1968 he held a  number of positions with Elliot Brothers, Ltd., England. Professor Hoare has published extensively and is on the editorial boards of a number of the world's foremost computer science journals. In 1973 he received the ACM Programming Systems and Languages Paper Award. Professor Hoare became a  Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society in 1978 and was awarded the degree of Doctor of Science Honoris Causa by the University of Southern California in 1979. The Turing Award is the Association for Computing Machinery's highest award for technical contributions to the computing community. It is presented each year in commemoration of Dr. A. M. Turing, an English mathematician who made many important contributions to the computing sciences. The Emperor's Old Clothes Charles Antony Richard Hoare Oxford University, England The author recounts his experiences in the implemen- tation, design, and standardization of computer program- ruing languages, and issues a  warning for the future. Key Words and Phrases: programming languages, history of programming languages, lessons for the future CR Categories: 1.2, 2.11, 4.2 Permission to  copy  without fee all  or  part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for  Computing  Machinery. To copy otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. Author's present address: C. A. R. Hoare, 45 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 6PE, England. © 1981 ACM 0001-0782/81/0200-0075 $00.75. 75 My first and most pleasant duty in this lecture is to express my profound gratitude to the Association  for Computing Machinery for the great honor which they have bestowed on me and for this opportunity to address you on a  topic of my choice. What a  difficult choice it is! My scientific achievements, so amply recognized by this award, have already been amply described in the scien- tific literature. Instead of repeating the abstruse techni- calities of my trade, I  would like to talk informally about myself, my personal experiences, my hopes and fears, my modest successes, and my rather less modest failures. I  have learned more from my failures than can  ever be revealed in the cold print of a  scientific article and  now I would like you to learn from them, too. Besides, failures Communications February 1981 of Volume 24 the ACM Number 2 
the background, or even shuffle in their seats. I admired but could not share his calm. Over lunch our customers were kind to try to comfort me. They had realized long ago that software to the original specification could never have been delivered, and even if it had been, they would not have known how to use its sophisticated features, and anyway many such large projects get cancelled before delivery. In retrospect, I believe our customers were fortunate that hardware limitations had protected them from the arbitrary excesses of our software designs. In the present day, users of microprocessors benefit from a similar protection--but not for much longer. At that time I was reading the early documents describing the concepts and features of the newly an- nounced OS 360, and of a new time-sharing project called Multics. These were far more comprehensive, elaborate, and sophisticated than anything I had imag- ined, even in the first version of the 503 Mark II software. Clearly IBM and MIT must be possessed of some secret of successful software design and implementation whose nature I could not even begin to guess at. It was only later that they realized they could not either. So I still could not see how I had brought such a great misfortune upon my company. At the time I was convinced that my managers were planning to dismiss me. But no, they were intending a far more severe punishment. "O.K. Tony," they said. "You got us into this mess and now you're going to get us out." "But I don't know how," I protested, but their reply was simple. "Well then, you'll have to fred out." They even expressed confidence that I could do so. I did not share their confidence. I was tempted to resign. It was the luckiest of all my lucky escapes that I did not. Of course, the company did everything they could to help me. They took away my responsibility for hardware design and reduced the size of my programming teams. Each of my managers explained carefully his own theory of what had gone wrong and all the theories were different. At last, there breezed into my office the most senior manager of all, a general manager of our parent company, Andrew St. Johnston. I was surprised that he had even heard of me. "You know what went wrong?" he shouted--he always shouted-- "You let your pro- grammers do things which you yourself do not under- stand." I stared in astonishment. He was obviously out of touch with present day realities. How could one person ever understand the whole of a modem software product like the Elliott 503 Mark II software system? I realized later that he was absolutely right; he had diagnosed the true cause of the problem and he had planted the seed of its later solution. I still had a team of some forty programmers and we needed to retain the good will of customers for our new machine and even regain the confidence of the customers for our old one. But what should we actually plan to do when we knew only one thing--that all our previous plans had failed? I therefore called an all-day meeting of our senior programmers on October 22, 1965, to thrash out the question between us. I still have the notes of that meeting. We first listed the recent major grievances of our customers: Cancellation of products, failure to meet deadlines, excessive size of software, "... not justified by the usefulness of the facilities provided," excessively slow programs, failure to take account of customer feedback; "Earlier attention paid to quite minor requests of our customers might have paid as great dividends of goodwill as the success of our most ambitious plans." We then listed our own grievances: Lack of machine time for program testing, unpredictability of machine time, lack of suitable peripheral equipment, unreliability of the hardware even when available, dispersion of pro- gramming staff, lack of equipment for keypunching of programs, lack of firm hardware delivery dates, lack of technical writing effort for documentation, lack of soft- ware knowledge outside of the programming group, interference from higher managers who imposed deci- sions, "... without a full realization of the more intricate implications of the matter," and overoptimism in the face of pressure from customers and the Sales Depart- ment. But we did not seek to excuse our failure by these grievances. For example, we admitted that it was the duty of programmers to educate their managers and other departments of the company by "... presenting the necessary information in a simple palatable form." The hope "... that deficiencies in original program specifi- cations could be made up by the skill of a technical writing department.., was misguided; the design of a program and the design of its specification must be undertaken in parallel by the same person, and they must interact with each other. A lack of clarity in speci- fication is one of the surest signs of a deficiency in the program it describes, and the two faults must be removed simultaneously before the project is embarked upon." I wish I had followed this advice in 1963; I wish we all would follow it today. My notes of the proceedings of that day in October 1965 include a complete section devoted to failings within the software group; this section rivals the most abject self-abasement of a revisionist official in the Chinese cultural revolution. Our main failure was over- ambition. "The goals which we have attempted have obviously proved to be far beyond our grasp." There was also failure in prediction, in estimation of program size and speed, of effort required, in planning the coordina- tion and interaction of programs, in providing an early warning that things were going wrong. There were faults in our control of program changes, documentation, liai- son with other departments, with our management, and with our customers. We failed in giving clear and stable definitions of the responsibilities of individual program- mers and project leaders,--Oh, need I go on? What was amazing was that a large team of highly intelligent programmers could labor so hard and so long on such 79 Communications February 1981 of Volume 24 the ACM Number 2 
an unpromising project. You know, you shouldn't trust us intelligent programmers. We can think up such good arguments for convincing ourselves and each other of the utterly absurd. Especially don't believe us when we promise to repeat an earlier success, only bigger and better next time. The last section of our inquiry into the failure dealt with the criteria of quality of software. "In the recent struggle to deliver any software at all, the first casualty has been consideration of the quality of the software delivered. The quality of software is measured by a number of totally incompatible criteria, which must be carefully balanced in the design and implementation of every program." We then made a fist of no less than seventeen criteria which has been published in a guest editorial in Volume 2 of the journal, Software Practice and Experience. How did we recover from the catastrophe? First, we classified our 503 customers into groups, according to the nature and size of the hardware configurations which they had bought--for example, those with magnetic tapes were all in one group. We assigned to each group of customers a small team of programmers and told the team leader to visit the customers to find out what they wanted; to select the easiest request to fulfil, and to make plans (but not promises) to implement it. In no case would we consider a request for a feature that would take more than three months to implement and deliver. The project leader would then have to convince me that the customers' request was reasonable, that the design of the new feature was appropriate, and that the plans and schedules for implementation were realistic. Above all, I did not allow anything to be done which I did not myself understand. It worked! The software requested began to be delivered on the promised dates. With an increase in our confidence and that of our customers, we were able to undertake fulfilling slightly more ambitious requests. Within a year we had recovered from the disaster. Within two years, we even had some moderately satisfied customers. Thus we muddled through by common sense and compromise to something approaching success. But I was not satisfied. I did not see why the design and implementation of an operating system should be so much more difficult than that of a compiler. This is the reason why I have devoted my later research to problems of parallel programming and language constructs which would assist in clear structuring of operating systems-- constructs such as monitors and communicating pro- cesses. While I was working at EUiotts', I became very interested in techniques for formal definition of program- ming languages. At that time, Peter Landin and Chris- topher Strachey proposed to define a programming lan- guage in a simple functional notation, that specified the effect of each command on a mathematically defined abstract machine. I was not happy with this proposal because I felt that such a definition must incorporate a number of fairly arbitrary representation decisions and would not be much simpler in principle than an imple- mentation of the language for a real machine. As an alternative, I proposed that a programming language definition should be formalized as a set of axioms, de- scribing the desired properties of programs written in the language. I felt that carefully formulated axioms would leave an implementation the necessary freedom to im- plement the language efficiently on different machines and enable the programmer to prove the correctness of his programs. But I did not see how to actually do it. I thought that it would need lengthy research to develop and apply the necessary techniques and that a university would be a better place to conduct such research than industry. So I applied for a chair in Computer Science at the Queen's University of Belfast where I was to spend nine happy and productive years. In October 1968, as I unpacked my papers in my new home in Belfast, I came across an obscure preprint of an article by Bob Floyd entitled, "Assigning Meanings to Programs." What a stroke of luck! At last I could see a way to achieve my hopes for my research. Thus I wrote my first paper on the axiomatic approach to computer programming, pub- lished in the Communications of the A CM in October 1969. Just recently, I have discovered that an early advocate of the assertional method of program proving was none other than Alan Turing himself. On June 24, 1950 at a conference in Cambridge, he gave a short talk entitled, "Checking a Large Routine" which explains the idea with great clarity. "How can one check a large routine in the sense of making sure that it's right? In order that the man who checks may not have too difficult a task, the programmer should make a number of definite assertions which can be checked individually, and from which the correctness of the whole program easily follows." Consider the analogy of checking an addition. If the sum is given [just as a column of figures with the answer below] one must check the whole at one sitting. But if the totals for the various columns are given, [with the carries added in separately], the checker's work is much easier, being split up into the checking of the various assertions [that each column is correctly added] and the small addition [of the carries to the total]. This principle can be applied to the checking of a large routine but we will illustrate the method by means of a small routine viz. one to obtain n factorial without the use of a multi- prier. Unfortunately there is no coding system suffi- ciently generally known to justify giving this routine in full, but a flow diagram will be sufficient for illustration. That brings me back to the main theme of my talk, the design of programming languages. During the period, August 1962 to October 1966, I attended every meeting of the IFIP ALGOL working group. After completing our labors on the IFIP ALGOL subset, we started on the design of ALGOL X, the intended 80 Communications February 1981 of Volume 24 the ACM Number 2 
successor to ALGOL 60. More suggestions for new features were made and in May 1965, Niklaus Wirth was com- missioned to collate them into a single language design. I was delighted by his draft design which avoided all the known defects of ALGOL 60 and included several new features, all of which could be simply and efficiently implemented, and safely and conveniently used. The description of the language was not yet complete. I worked hard on making suggestions for its improve- ment and so did many other members of our group. By the time of the next meeting in St. Pierre de Chartreuse, France in October 1965, we had a draft of an excellent and realistic language design which was published in June 1966 as "A Contribution to the Development of ALGOL", in the Communications of the A CM. It was implemented on the IBM 360 and given the title ALGOL W by its many happy users. It was not only a worthy successor of ALGOL 60, it was even a worthy predecessor of PASCAL. At the same meeting, the ALGOL committee had placed before it, a short, incomplete and rather incom- prehensible document, describing a different, more am- bitious and, to me, a far less attractive language. I was astonished when the working group, consisting of all the best known international experts of programming lan- guages, resolved to lay aside the commissioned draft on which we had all been working and swallow a line with such an unattractive bait. This happened just one week after our inquest on the 503 Mark II software project. I gave desperate warnings against the obscurity, the complexity, and overambition of the new design, but my warnings went unheeded. I conclude that there are two ways of constructing a software design: One way is to make it so simple that there are obviously no deficiencies and the other way is to make it so complicated that there are no obvious deficiencies. The first method is far more difficult. It demands the same skill, devotion, insight, and even inspiration as the discovery of the simple physical laws which underlie the complex phenomena of nature. It also requires a willing- ness to accept objectives which are limited by physical, logical, and technological constraints, and to accept a compromise when conflicting objectives cannot be met. No committee will ever do this until it is too late. So it was with the ALGOL committee. Clearly the draft which it preferred was not yet perfect. So a new and fmal draft of the new ALGOL language design was promised in three months' time; it was to be submitted to the scrutiny of a subgroup of four members including myself. Three months came and went, without a word of the new draft. After six months, the subgroup met in the Netherlands. We had before us a longer and thicker document, full of errors corrected at the last minute, describing yet another but to me, equally unattractive language. Niklaus Wirth and I spent some time trying to get removed some of the deficiencies in the design and 81 in the description, but in vain. The completed final draft of the language was promised for the next meeting of the full ALGOL committee in three months time. Three months came and went--not a word of the new draft appeared. After six months, in October 1966, the ALGOL working group met in Warsaw. It had before it an even longer and thicker document, full of errors corrected at the last minute, describing equally obscurely yet another different, and to me, equally unattractive language. The experts in the group could not see the defects of the design and they firmly resolved to adopt the draft, believing it would be completed in three months. In vain, I told them it would not. In vain, I urged them to remove some of the technical mistakes of the language, the predominance of references, the default type conversions. Far from wishing to simplify the lan- guage, the working group actually asked the authors to include even more complex features like overloading of operators and concurrency. When any new language design project is nearing completion, there is always a mad rush to get new features added before standardization. The rush is mad indeed, because it leads into a trap from which there is no escape. A feature which is omitted can always be added later, when its design and its implications are well understood. A feature which is included before it is fully understood can never be removed later. At last, in December 1968, in a mood of black depression, I attended the meeting in Munich at which our long-gestated monster was to come to birth and receive the name ALGOL 68. By this time, a number of other members of the group had become disillusioned, but too late: The committee was now packed with sup- porters of the language, which was sent up for promul- gation by the higher committees of IFIP. The best we could do was to send with it a minority report, stating our considered view that, "... as a tool for the reliable creation of sophisticated programs, the language was a failure." This report was later suppressed by IFIP, an act which reminds me of the lines of Hilaire Belloc, But scientists, who ought to know/Assure us that it must be so./ Oh, let us never, never doubt/What nobody is sure about. I did not attend any further meetings of that working group. I am pleased to report that the group soon came to realize that there was something wrong with their language and with its description; they labored hard for six more years to produce a revised description of the language. It is a great improvement but I'm afraid, that in my view, it does not remove the basic technical flaws in the design, nor does it begin to address the problem of its overwhelming complexity. Programmers are always surrounded by complexity; we cannot avoid it. Our applications are complex because we are ambitious to use our computers in ever more sophisticated ways. Programming is complex because of Communications February 1981 of Volume 24 the ACM Number 2 
the large number of conflicting objectives for each of our programming projects. If our basic tool, the language in which we design and code our programs, is also compli- cated, the language itself becomes part of the problem rather than part of its solution. Now let me tell you about yet another overambitious language project. Between 1965 and 1970 I was a mem- ber and even chairman of the Technical Committee No. 10 of the European Computer Manufacturers Associa- tion. We were charged first with a watching brief and then with the standardization of a language to end all languages, designed to meet the needs of all computer applications, both commercial and scientific, by the greatest computer manufacturer of all time. I had studied with interest and amazement, even a touch of amuse- ment, the four initial documents describing a language called NPL, which appeared between March 1 and No- vember 30, 1964. Each was more ambitious and absurd than the last in its wishful speculations. Then the lan- guage began to be implemented and a new series of documents began to appear at six-monthly intervals, each describing the final frozen version of the language, under its final frozen name PL/I. But to me, each revision of the document simply showed how far the initial F-level implementation had progressed. Those parts of the language that were not yet implemented were still described in free-flowing flowery prose giving promise of unalloyed delight. In the parts that had been implemented, the flowers had with- ered; they were choked by an undergrowth of explana- tory footnotes, placing arbitrary and unpleasant restric- tions on the use of each feature and loading upon a programmer the responsibility for controlling the com- plex and unexpected side-effects and interaction effects with all the other features of the language. At last, March 11, 1968, the language description was nobly presented to the waiting world as a worthy can- didate for standardization. But it was not. It had already undergone some seven thousand corrections and modi- fications at the hand of its original designers. Another twelve editions were needed before it was finally pub- lished as a standard in 1976. I fear that this was not because everybody concerned was satisfied with its de- sign, but because they were thoroughly bored and disil- lusioned. For as long as I was involved in this project, I urged that the language be simplified, if necessary by subset- ting, so that the professional programmer would be able to understand it and be able to take responsibility for the correctness and cost-effectiveness of his programs. I urged that the dangerous features such as defaults and ON- conditions be removed. I knew that it would be impossible to write a wholly reliable compiler for a language of this complexity and impossible to write a wholly reliable program when the correctness of each part of the program depends on checking that every other part of the program has avoided all the traps and pitfalls of the language. 82 At first I hoped that such a technically unsound project would collapse but I soon realized it was doomed to success. Almost anything in software can be imple- mented, sold, and even used given enough determina- tion. There is nothing a mere scientist can say that will stand against the flood of a hundred million dollars. But there is one quality that cannot be purchased in this way--and that is reliability. The price of reliability is the pursuit of the utmost simplicity. It is a price which the very rich find most hard to pay. All this happened a long time ago. Can it be regarded as relevant in a conference dedicated to a preview of the Computer Age that lies ahead? It is my gravest fear that it can. The mistakes which have made in the last twenty years are being repeated today on an even grander scale. I refer to a language design project which has generated documents entitled strawman, woodenman, tinman, iron- man, steelman, green and finally now ADA. This project has been initiated and sponsored by one of the world's most powerful organizations, the United States Depart- ment of Defense. Thus it is ensured of an influence and attention quite independent of its technical merits and its faults and deficiencies threaten us with far greater dangers. For none of the evidence we have so far can inspire confidence that this language has avoided any of the problems that have afflicted other complex language projects of the past. I have been giving the best of my advice to this project since 1975. At first I was extremely hopeful. The original objectives of the language, included reliability, readability of programs, formality of language definition, and even simplicity. Gradually these objectives have been sacrificed in favor of power, supposedly achieved by a plethora of features and notational conventions, many of them unnecessary and some of them, like ex- ception handling, even dangerous. We relive the history of the design of the motor car. Gadgets and glitter prevail over fundamental concerns of safety and economy. It is not too late! I believe that by careful pruning of the ADA language, it is still possible to select a very powerful subset that would be reliable and efficient in implementation and safe and economic in use. The sponsors of the language have declared unequivocally, however, that there shall be no subsets. This is the strangest paradox of the whole strange project. If you want a language with no subsets, you must make it small. You include only those features which you know to be needed for every single application of the language and which you know to be appropriate for every single hardware configuration on which the language is imple- mented. Then extensions can be specially designed where necessary for particular hardware devices and for partic- ular applications. That is the great strength of PASCAL, that there are so few unnecessary features and almost no need for subsets. That is why the language is strong enough to support specialized extensions--Concurrent PASCAL for real time work, PASCAL PLUS for discrete event simulation, UESD PASCAL for microprocessor work Communications February 1981 of Volume 24 the ACM Number 2 
stations. If only we could learn the right lessons from the successes of the past, we would not need to learn from our failures. And so, the best of my advice to the originators and designers of ADA has been ignored. In this last resort, I appeal to you, representatives of the programming profession in the United States, and citizens concerned with the welfare and safety of your own country and of mankind: Do not allow this language in its present state to be used in applications where reliability is critical, i.e., nuclear power stations, cruise missiles, early warning systems, anti-ballistic missile defense systems. The next rocket to go astray as a result of a programming language error may not be an exploratory space rocket on a harmless trip to Venus: It may be a nuclear warhead exploding over one of our own cities. An unreliable programming language generating unreliable programs constitutes a far greater risk to our environment and to our society than unsafe cars, toxic pesticides, or accidents at nuclear power stations. Be vigilant to reduce that risk, not to increase it. Let me not end on this somber note. To have our best advice ignored is the common fate of all who take on the role of consultant, ever since Cassandra pointed out the dangers of bringing a wooden horse within the walls of Troy. That reminds me of a story I used to hear in my childhood. As far as I recall, its title was: The Emperor's Old Clothes Many years ago, there was an Emperor who was so excessively fond of clothes that he spent all his money on dress. He did not trouble himself with soldiers, attend banquets, or give judgement in court. Of any other king or emperor one might say, "He is sitting in council," but it was always said of him, "The emperor is sitting in his wardrobe." And so he was. On one unfortunate occasion, he had been tricked into going forth naked to his chagrin and the glee of his subjects. He resolved never to leave his throne, and to avoid nakedness, he ordered that each of his many new suits of clothes should be simply draped on top of the old. Time passed away merrily in the large town that was his capital. Ministers and courtiers, weavers and tailors, visitors and subjects, seamstresses and embroiderers, went in and out of the throne room about their various tasks, and they all exclaimed, "How magnificent is the attire of our Emperor." One day the Emperor's oldest and most faithful Minister heard tell of a most distinguished tailor who taught at an ancient institute of higher stitchcraft, and who had developed a new art of abstract embroidery using stitches so refined that no one could tell whether they were actually there at all. "These must indeed be splendid stitches," thought the minister. "If we can but engage this tailor to advise us, we will bring the adorn- ment of our Emperor to such heights of ostentation that all the world will acknowledge him as the greatest Em- peror there has ever been." So the honest old Minister engaged the master tailor at vast expense. The tailor was brought to the throne room where he made obeisance to the heap of fine clothes which now completely covered the throne. All the courtiers waited eagerly for his advice. Imagine their astonishment when his advice was not to add sophisti- cation and more intricate embroidery to that which already existed, but rather to remove layers of the finery, and strive for simplicity and elegance in place of extrav- agant elaboration. "This tailor is not the expert that he claims," they muttered. "His wits have been addled by long contemplation in his ivory tower and he no longer understands the sartorial needs of a modern Emperor." The tailor argued loud and long for the good sense of his advice but could not make himself heard. Finally, he accepted his fee and returned to his ivory tower. Never to this very day has the full truth of this story been told: That one fine morning, when the Emperor felt hot and bored, he extricated himself carefully from under his mountain of clothes and is now living happily as a swineherd in another story. The tailor is canonized as the patron saint of all consultants, because in spite of the enormous fees that he extracted, he was never able to convince his clients of his dawning realization that their clothes have no Emperor. 83 Communications February 1981 of Volume 24 the ACM Number 2 
